# Comparative analysis of Jain *Bhagwan* Parshvanath Digamber *archana* using AI and ML
<p align="center">
  Rahi Jain <br> (Project Duration: Sep-Dec'2025, Publication date: 30 December, 2025)
</p>

## Background
In Digamber Jain tradition, God (*Bhagwan*) *archana* forms an important part of practicing the religion. However, many devotees, especially younger generation, may struggle to comprehend the meaning and importance of performing *archana*. Further, existence of different forms of *archana* like *Puja*, *Aarti* and *Chalisa* only adds to the complexity of comprehending the practice.

Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) are the new disruptive technologies which have gained the traction for their abilities to process literature and knowledge and provide valuable insights. Thus, it will be relevant to use the AI and ML techniques to understand the different *archanas* done in the Digamber Jain tradition.

This study compares the three different forms of  *archana* i.e., *Puja*, *Aarti* and *Chalisa* to better understand their thematic similarities and differences. A case study approach is used, thus *archana* literature of Parshvanath *Bhagwan* is used for this study.

## Methodology
The methodology for the study could be divided into five main steps namely, data collection, theme selection, prompt engineering and AI analysis, expert review and data analysis. The first step in the study is data collection. The relevant literature on Parshvanath *Bhagwan archana* is collected using purposive sampling approach. The next step is theme selection where the themes used for comparing the sample literature are selected using expert judgement. An expert devotee and digamber jain studies teacher from the JSOT, Toronto, Canada temple was consulted and explained the purpose of this study. 

Prompt engineering was the next step which used zero-shot prompting combined with persona prompting (ZSP). The ZSP prompt approach was selected based on various preliminary trial performance of zero-shot prompting approach with and without persona prompting. The Retrieval Augumented Generation (RAG) integrated Large Language Model (LLM) was used as the AI model to analyse the sample literature based on prompts. Compared to standard LLM models which uses only its static trained data to provide response to a prompt, RAG based LLM architecture allows the LLM model to search and analyze the external data before providing response to the prompts. Thus, RAG based LLM can provide more accurate results. A free version of commercially available AI tool called ChatPDF was used for AI analysis.

Expert review step verified the responses generated by the AI model for its fidelity with themes by the expert. The responses were discarded completely or partially, if they did not represent the themes used under the study. Final step is the data analysis which assessed the thematic similarity between different *archana* forms. An unsupervised ML technique called Hierarchical Agglomerative Clustering (HAC) was used for the analysis. The analysis was done using Spyder IDE of the python programming language. 

## Results and Discussion
### *Data collection*
The study used the purposive sampling approach to select sample literature from various religious books for each *archana* form. The key characteristic used for sample selection is the commonality of its usage  in the daily practice by devotees. An expert opinion is sought for the sample selection. Accordingly, digamber *Jinvani*, a sacred and a commonly used book for *archana*, is used as the sample literature source. One sample of each *archana* type (Appendix 1, Appendix 2, Appendix 3) is also selected  from the book.

### *Theme Selection*
The study used the expert judgement to define the themes for comparing the different *archana* types. The expert suggested the themes based on primary understanding expected from the devotees. Three themes are selected for this study, namely, virtues of *Bhagwan*, rituals and motivation of *shravak*. The virtues of *Bhagwan* theme intends to identify the ideas in each *archana* type which represents the inherent qualities and attributes of the *Bhagwan*. The rituals theme intends to identify the ideas in each *archana* type which represents the various practices which a Jain devotee may pursue as a part of his relgion. The motivation of *shravak* theme intends to identify the ideas in each *archana* type which represents the different intentions which a devotee may draw from the literature. 

### *Prompt Engineering and AI Analysis*
The study created zero-shot prompts with persona. The prompt is designed for the AI model to identify the top five ideas in a given theme for a given sample *archana* document. AI model is expected to accept the personality of an expert who excels in identifying main themes from a document. In total three prompts are created as follows:
* Prompt 1: Assume that you are an expert in identifying the main themes. What are the top five virtues contained in this content for God on basis of Digamber Jain perspective? Please note that if number of virtues are less than five than mention less than five virtues. Only virtues must be strictly mentioned. If no virtues are mentioned then you should say no virtues are mentioned.
* Prompt 2: Assume that you are an expert in identifying the main themes. What are the top five ritual themes contained in this content from a Digamber Jain perspective? Please note that if number of ritual themes are less than five than mention less than five ritual themes. Only ritual themes must be strictly mentioned. If no ritual themes are mentioned then you should say no ritual themes are mentioned.
* Prompt 3: Assume that you are an expert in identifying the main themes. What are the top five motivation or intention themes contained in this content from a Digamber Jain perspective? Please note that if number of motivation or intention themes are less than five than mention less than five motivation or intention themes. Only motivation or intention themes must be strictly mentioned. If no motivation or intention themes are mentioned then you should say no motivation or intention themes are mentioned.

These prompts are provided to the AI model in Chatpdf tool for each document separately. The AI model analyze the document based on the prompt and provide the results. A sample result of AI response for the motivation theme in the *Puja* form of *archana* is shown below.

" *The top five motivation or intention themes contained in this content from a Digamber Jain perspective are: <br> 1. Attainment of Liberation (मोक्ष): The primary goal is to achieve salvation or liberation from the cycle of birth and death (भव-पार), and never forget this ultimate aim. <br>
2. Destruction of Karma: A core motivation is to destroy all types of karma (असुकम, अषकमव, मोह-ध्ं ा), which is seen as essential for spiritual purity and liberation. <br>
3. Attainment of Happiness and Prosperity: Devotees seek increased happiness, wealth, good family relations (पुत-वमत्), and comfort in this life.<br>
4. Devotion and Service to the Lord: There is a strong intention to always serve the revered Lord Parshwanath (प् शवस् थ देव सेव आपक् करँ सद्), expressing deep reverence and dedication.<br>
5. Purity and Removal of Worldly Sorrows: Worship is undertaken with the intention of becoming pure and eliminating all worldly sorrows and suffering (दु:ख सब ि् य भ् वा व् पे सवह वका ह्).* "

The model is able to provide the top five ideas related to motivation in *Puja* document. It also tries to provide the meaning of the idea and reference text from the document which it used to arrive at those ideas. However, idea two (*Destruction of karma*) and five (*Purity and removal of wordly sorrows*) are redundant. Further, it indicates that the AI model can provide the same idea using different words. Thus, it suggests the need for human review and processing to improve the accuracy of the results.

### *Expert Review*
The expert reviewed the responses of the AI model. Overall an average accuracy of 89% [60-100%] is found in the AI response. In some cases, the redundant ideas are presented as different ideas by the model. For example, "*Destruction of karma*" and "*Purity and removal of wordly sorrows*" are two similar ideas which AI model presented as two distinct ideas while responding to the motivation themes in *Puja* document. In other cases, ideas deviated from the theme. For example, one of the ideas in the AI response for ritual themes in *Aarti* document is "*Seeking Refuge and Supplication (Sharaṇa Grahana and Arja)*", which aligned more closely with the idea of God providing safe haven to its devotees rather than a ritual practice performed by devotees. 

Further, it is found that same idea could be presented with similar terms in different responses. For example: AI model identified the similar idea of devotion and service for the motivation theme in all three forms of *archana* but with different words. The words used in *Puja*, *Aarti* and *Chalisa* to provide the ideas are "*Devotion and Service to the Lord*", "*Profound Devotion and Unwavering Faith (Bhakti and Nishtha)*" and "*Devotion, Protection, and Service to the Enlightened*" respectively.

The expert reviewed and processed the AI responses. The common ideas are aggregated into single ideas while out of scope ideas are discarded. The themes identified across the three documents is given below:
* The virtue themes are
* The ritual themes are
* The motivation themes are

### *Data Analysis*

## Conclusion
